# Extracted Content from 82418-Joao-Monteiro-resumo-alargado.pdf

Total pages: 10


## Page 1

Global Illumination with GPU Vertex Connection and Merging
Jo~ ao Monteiro
jna.monteiro@gmail.com
Instituto Superior T ecnico, Lisboa, Portugal
October 2020
Abstract
There have been continuous developments in the eld of computer generated graphics. In 2012,
a new algorithm was presented, the vertex connection and merging, which consists in using dierent
already existing algorithms to process a scene, to get the generated images with best quality among
them. The main disadvantage of this approach, which is also present on each of the rendering
algorithms, consists in the time it takes to create a realistic render. One of the possible approaches
to reduce the time needed to process the information is the usage of a graphics processing unit, in
order to take advantage of its multiple cores and parallelization capabilities. The rendering algorithms
use, by nature, memory not in the most ecient way, with cache memory as an example. This is
due to paths traced between camera and light sources having the possibility to be created in very
distinct directions, even for adjacent pixels, which causes distant memory positions to be accessed,
resulting in cache misses. On the other hand, CUDA applications are the most ecient when ecient
memory access patterns are used. This thesis explores the conversion of an implementation of the
vertex connection and merging algorithm, originally developed to be processed on the CPU, to be
processed using NVIDIA GPUs. The goal of this conversion is to have images generated faster by the
computer. The dierent types of memory in the GPU are used to optimize its performance, and a
detailed analysis of the performance is done using the proling tools provided by NVIDIA. Finally, this
analysis explains why the obtained results are dierent from the expected, being the images generated
faster using the original algorithm implementation.
Keywords: CUDA, GPU, VCM, parallelism, rendering
1. Introduction
Creating physically based renders has been an ac-
tive subject of research since James Kajiya intro-
duced the light transport equation, also known as
rendering equation, in 1986 [9]. Until now, the most
ecient way to generate these renders still takes a
great amount of processing power, and is not nor-
mally done in real time. Physically based rendering
takes into account physical equations, in order to
simulate accurate lighting, where the law of con-
servation of energy is taken into account. Com-
plex scenes typically contain multiple light sources
and hundreds or thousands of objects, where the
light bounces. All these properties make complex
scenes very computationally intensive to be gener-
ated with enough accuracy and with reduced or no
noise, and so, dierent rendering algorithms have
appeared over the years. Vertex connection and
merging (VCM), one of the state-of-the-art render-
ing algorithms presented in 2012, combines the re-
sults of dierent algorithms. The simulated light
photons, generated by photon mapping, are con-
nected to the camera using path tracing, and therenders can be processed faster, as less paths are
traced, with the advantage of resulting in less noisy
renders. Along with the evolution of rendering al-
gorithms, the processing capabilities of central pro-
cessing units (CPU) and graphics processing units
(GPU) have also been improved through the years,
allowing much more data to be processed than be-
fore. Applications that have an inherently parallel
architecture and require a lot of processing power
have been developed to be processed using GPUs,
as these are specically designed to process tasks in
parallel. Since NVIDIA introduced CUDA in 2006
[1], and the Khronos Group introduced OpenCL in
2008 [6], the development of software to be pro-
cessed on the GPU was made much easier, allowing
developers to take advantage of the parallel pro-
cessing capabilities of this hardware. As the ren-
dering algorithms consist mainly in repeating the
same tasks for each image pixel generated, GPU
are perfectly suitable for processing them. The goal
of this thesis is to implement VCM using CUDA,
in order to be processed on NVIDIA GPUs and
take advantage of their parallelism capabilities. The
1

---

## Page 2

source code basis for the algorithm implementation
is SmallVCM, an application developed in C++ by
the algorithm's author.
2. Background
2.1. Illumination
One of the most important elements of an image
is illumination. Computer generated scenes have a
concept of light, and its physical properties are sim-
ulated to achieve a very high degree of realism. Be-
sides the properties of an object material, the light
is also responsible for the nal colors obtained in the
scene. Just like in the real world, the light that illu-
minates an object may be in direct or indirect line
of sight, being it direct or indirect illumination, re-
spectively. In the case where an object is indirectly
lit, this light is transmitted by other objects.
2.2. Multiple importance sampling
Samples resulting from dierent rendering algo-
rithms can be combined, in order to get the ad-
vantages of them in dierent locations in a scene.
Multiple importance sampling was presented by
Veach in 1995 [12], and allows the combination of
these dierent sampling techniques by calculating
the weight that each is going to have in the nal re-
sult. This is done by calculating the variance of each
of the techniques used, and giving it a weight in the
nal combination. Without using MIS, when ren-
dering a scene where multiple results get combined,
there can be a high variance in the samples, and
summing the dierent sampling results worsens the
problem, leading to noise in the nal render. Fig-
ure 1 shows the result of combining two rendering
techniques using MIS.
Figure 1: Sampling the light sources, sampling the
BSDF and MIS (Source: Veach 1995 [12])
2.3. Ray tracing
In the ray tracing (RT) algorithm, presented by
Turner Whitted in 1980 [13], a ray is shot from the
camera towards the screen, hitting then the objects
in the scene. This was the rst algorithm that re-
cursively traced additional rays when the initial ray
hit an object that was not diuse. These new addi-
tional rays can have dierent types, being reection,
refraction or shadow rays.
2.4. Path tracing
The path tracing (PT) algorithm, which was pre-
sented by Kajiya in 1986 [9], also renders an im-age by shooting a ray from the camera towards the
screen, but the ray bounces from the objects until it
reaches a light in the scene. When the ray intersects
an object, the bidirectional scattering distribution
function (BSDF) is taken into account.
2.5. Light tracing
The light tracing (LT) algorithm, which was pre-
sented by Arvo in 1986 [3], uses an approach that is
the inverse of the one used in PT. In LT, the ray is
cast from the light source, bouncing in the objects
according to their BSDF. This algorithm allows the
rendering of caustics, but the specular reections
seen by the camera cannot be calculated.
2.6. Bidirectional path tracing
In 1998, Veach presented a new algorithm called
bidirectional path tracing [11] (BDPT). This algo-
rithm uses both PT and LT, and after a predened
number of iterations, the resulting paths of each al-
gorithm are connected. Both the PT and LT paths
are initiated at the same time. These paths can
then be connected by using a single ray between
them, resulting in a single path, or using multiple
rays connecting all the points from both paths, re-
sulting in multiple paths.
2.7. Photon mapping
The photon mapping (PM) algorithm was presented
in 1996 by Jensen [8], and like BDPT, allows the
connection of dierent types of paths. However,
in the case of PM, whenever the rays originated
in the light source intersect an object, being these
intersection points the photons, their properties are
stored on a map. After the photon tracing, PT
is used. When a ray originated in the camera is
close enough to a photon intersection point, these
are merged.
2.8. Progressive photon mapping
Progressive photon mapping (PPM) is an algorithm
presented by Hachisuka in 2008 [7], and improves
the PM by reducing the amount of memory used.
In this algorithm, the rst pass is a regular RT pass,
identifying all the visible objects from the camera.
The subsequent passes are all photon tracing passes.
Whenever a photon is traced, the resulting intersec-
tion point is compared with the RT intersections. If
the photon is close to one of the RT intersections,
its contribution is added to the illumination value,
and the properties of the photon intersection are
not stored in memory.
2.9. Vertex connection and merging
Vertex connection and merging was presented in
2012, by Georgiev [5]. This algorithm uses both
BDPT and a reimplementation of PM as a path
sampling technique, and allows the merging of both
techniques. As the original implementation of the
2

---

## Page 3

PM algorithm does not increase its render qual-
ity by increasing the amount of samples processed,
VCM reformulation of PM allows new iterations to
increase quality just like the other algorithms, and
be dependent on the number of samples.
Figure 2: Merging of BDPT and PM using an
heuristic (highlighted in red and green), and VCM
with MIS (Source: Georgiev et al. 2012 [5])
To merge BDPT and PM, MIS is used. The ren-
der quality is then improved, giving all the benets
of the dierent algorithms. Small camera apertures
and small lights can be rendered easily, while keep-
ing the caustics generated by PM. Consequently,
scenes with lots of dierent materials can now be
rendered eciently, without the noise that was gen-
erated with the previously used methods. Figure 2
shows the results of BDPT and PM being merged
using VCM, eliminating most of the noise.
2.10. Light path tracing
The rst stage of the algorithm is the tracing of light
paths. Light paths have origin on each light source,
and the resulting hit points, throughput and contri-
bution for both connection and merging are stored.
The stored data is called a light vertex. These con-
tributions are later used to weight the contribution
to the nal color. Additionally, this stored data en-
sures that light paths are reused, in a similar way
to how PM photons are used. When the light ver-
tex is not purely specular and the path length limit
is reached, the vertex is connected to the camera,
contributing to the nal color.
2.11. Camera path tracing
The second stage of the algorithm is the tracing of
eye or camera paths. These paths are calculated
like in BDPT algorithm. Similarly to light paths,
each camera path also has a limited length, being
also divided into sub paths. The end of each camera
sub path is a camera or eye vertex. Unlike the light
vertices, camera vertices are not stored in memory.
However, the color contribution for these paths is
calculated according to dierent conditions. If a
path does not intersect any geometry, and if there is
an environment light, the color contribution for this
path is based on this light color. On the other hand,
if a path maximum length is reached without any of
the camera vertices being close to a light vertex, the
color contribution is then sampled from a random
light. Finally, if a camera vertex is close enough to alight vertex, both are merged. Otherwise, both are
connected. In VCM, each light vertex is assigned to
a path index, and the corresponding camera vertex
is also dened using the same path index.
2.12. Vertex connection
The vertex connection stage takes place inside the
camera path tracing. The path index is used to de-
termine which light vertices should be connected to
the camera vertex. This is done by getting the light
vertices that match the current camera path. Then,
every light vertex previously identied is connected
to the current camera vertex, as long as the total
length of the path is not greater than the maxi-
mum path length. The total length of the path
takes into account the current camera path length,
and the path length for each light vertex being con-
nected. Finally, the camera vertex is also connected
to a random light source. This stage is illustrated
in gure 3.
2.13. Vertex merging
After the vertex connection stage, vertex merging
takes place, which is illustrated in gure 3. Here,
the light vertices are merged with camera vertices.
This merge occurs when both vertices are within a
specied radius, the acceptance radius.
Figure 3: Camera and light paths with dierent
lengths, and merging of camera and light vertices
within the acceptance radius (Source: Georgiev et
al. 2012 [5])
When a scene is rendered using multiple itera-
tions, if the vertices are merged using the same ra-
dius between iterations, the nal render may con-
tain errors by being blurred. In order to minimize
these errors, the radius is constantly decreased, in
subsequent iterations, needing then the vertices to
be closer to be merged. Initially the radius has a
value r1, and in each iteration, the value is reduced
proportionally to a constant , as proposed by the
author in equation (1).
ri=r1p
i 1 (1)
2.14. Algorithm overview
As discussed previously, VCM runs in two dierent
main stages, being these the light path sampling
and the camera path tracing. During the camera
path sampling stage, vertex connection and merging
3

---

## Page 4

also take place. Finally, after each iteration, the
acceptance radius is reduced. The pseudocode for
the algorithm is listed in 1, based on the algorithm
described by the author of VCM [4].
// Renders progressively by averaging the
results from N independent iterations
function ProgressiveRender(r1, , N, image
)
for i = 1 to N do
iterationImage = BlackImage()
ri=r1p
i 1
Render(ri, iterationImage)
image =i 1
iimage +1
iiterationImage
end for
end function
// Renders a single image with a given
maximum vertex merging radius
function Render(r)
// Stage 1: Light path sampling
for i = 1 to pixelCount do
lightVertex = TraceLightRay(
SamplePixel(i))
while lightVertex is valid do
if lightVertex is not specular
StoreLightVertex(lightVertex)
ConnectToCamera(lightVertex)
end if
lightVertex = ContinueRandomWalk(
lightVertex)
end while
end for
BuildRangeSearchStruct(lightVertices)
// Stage 2: Camera path sampling and
vertex connection and merging
for i = 1 to pixelCount do
cameraVertex = TraceCameraRay(
SamplePixel(i))
while cameraVertex is valid do
// Unidirectional sampling (US)
if cameraVertex is emissive then
Accumulate(cameraVertex, US, r, i)
end if
// Vertex connection (VC)
for lightVertex in lightPaths[i] [
SampleLightPoint() do
Accumulate(Connect(cameraVertex,
lightVertex), VC, r, i)
end for
// Vertex merging (VM)
for lightVertex in RangeSearch(
cameraVertex, r) do
Accumulate(Merge(cameraVertex,
lightVertex), VM, r, i)
end for
cameraVertex = ContinueRandomWalk(
cameraVertex)
end while
end for
end function
// Accumulates the pixel measurement
estimate due to a given pathfunction Accumulate(path, technique, r, i)
contrib = MeasurementContribution(path,
technique, r)
pdf = PDF(path, technique, r)
weight = PowerHeuristic(path, technique,
pdf)
image[i] += weight * contrib / pdf
end function
Listing 1: VCM algorithm pseudocode
During the light path tracing, the rst main stage
introduced in 2.10, light paths are created from light
sources. When the emitted ray intersects an object
in the scene, the light vertex information is stored,
and a new ray has a probability of being emitted
from the intersection point. This process continues
until the path reaches the maximum length, or un-
til an intersection in the scene is not found. When
each intersection occurs, the color contribution of
the light vertices is also stored in the frame buer,
by connecting the camera to these vertices. Be-
fore tracing the camera paths, which is the second
main stage, a range search data structure is cre-
ated, which is later used to detect the light vertices
that are closer to the camera vertices, in order to
perform both vertex connection and merging oper-
ations. This detection is done using the radius that
is dened for the current render iteration. The cam-
era path tracing stage, introduced in 2.11, is then
run for every pixel of the image. It starts by emit-
ting a ray from the camera position, and detecting
intersections, generating camera vertices. If there
is an intersection with a purely emissive material, a
light source, the color contribution is added to the
frame buer. All camera vertices are connected to
all the light vertices assigned to the current path,
connected to a random light, and if there are any
light vertices inside the range dened by the itera-
tion radius, these are also merged with the camera
vertex. These contributions are then added to the
frame buer. The connection and merging stages
are introduced in 2.12 and 2.13, respectively. After
a camera vertex is created, a new sub path is cre-
ated based on russian roulette probability, or if the
path has not reached the maximum length yet.
2.15. SmallVCM
VCM has an experimental implementation, Small-
VCM, created by its author [2]. Here, the dierent
techniques used to render an image using the VCM
algorithm are implemented and executed solely on
the CPU, with multi threading support. When ren-
dering an image, multiple renderers of the VCM al-
gorithm are created and processed in parallel, using
OpenMP. The number of renderers used is equal to
the number of processors Each renderer has dier-
ences in the MIS weight calculation, related with
the acceptance radius. After each iteration, the
results from each renderer are stored in dierent
4

---

## Page 5

buers and then combined, to get the nal render.
Each of these renderers is, in fact, rendering individ-
ual iterations. The implementation of VCM follows
the approach described in the algorithm pseudocode
listed in listing 1. Initially, light paths are traced,
followed by camera paths. Light and camera ver-
tices are then connected and merged in the camera
path tracing stage, using a range search data struc-
ture, which is calculated between the light and cam-
era path tracing stages.
2.16. Parallel processing using GPU
Due to the nature of the GPU hardware, which con-
tains more transistors to process data, a high num-
ber of tasks can run in parallel. When dealing with
graphics, these are processed using vertex or frag-
ment shaders, among others. Before the appearance
of NVIDIA CUDA in 2006, there was an era where
the GPU started being used to process complex sci-
ence and engineering problems [10]. However, in
order to be able to access the hardware resources,
developers needed to create very complex shaders
and data, in order to process the latter as textures
or as 3D objects. This era coincided with the ap-
pearance of DirectX 9. When GPU were being used
as general purpose hardware, they were called gen-
eral purpose GPU (GPGPU).
2.17. NVIDIA CUDA
In 2006, NVIDIA introduced a new revolution-
ary programming model, CUDA [1], which allows
the development of software to be processed in
the GPU, without having to write pixel shaders.
NVIDIA introduced a set of extensions in the C
language, allowing the developers to write code to
be executed in the GPU without having to create
the previous complex shaders and data. This pro-
gramming model was introduced in the G80 series,
and since this series the GPU come with a number
of CUDA cores.
2.17.1 GPU Processors
The hardware present in a CUDA enabled GPU has
some important dierences when compared to the
previous one. The GPU contains processing cores
denominated by streaming multiprocessors (SM),
which also contain a number of streaming proces-
sors (SP). SP are also denominated as CUDA cores.
2.18. GPU threads
The SM process threads in sets of 32, called warps.
These are especially important when a warp is ac-
cessing global memory, which is a slow process, as
a new warp starts its execution, reducing the time
that the hardware is waiting for data to process.
2.19. GPU Memory
Unlike the host system RAM, a GPU has dierent
types of memory available. There are two dierentgroups of memory in a GPU, being one the device
memory, where all data is accessible to all SM, and
the SM memory itself, only accessible to each SM
and corresponding threads. Global, local, constant
and texture memory types are located in the device
memory (o-chip memory), while the shared mem-
ory and registers are located on each SM (on-chip
memory), being these the fastest memory types.
3. Implementation
In order to implement VCM using CUDA, Smal-
lVCM is used as the code base, and changes are
made on top of it, as mentioned previously.
3.1. CUDA threads
Each iteration processes all pixels of an image. As
the number of threads is the same number of pix-
els, the total number of threads is then WH
threads. For each pixel, each thread then processes
all paths. The paths cannot be processed in par-
allel, as the values of subsequent paths depend on
previous paths. For example, the Multiple Impor-
tance Sample (MIS) values from previous paths are
divided by the BSDF values of the current path,
not being possible to calculate these independently.
Blocks are set to have a maximum of 256 threads.
This ensures that there are enough warps ready to
be started when others are idle, when data is being
read from memory. With this number of threads,
there are 8 warps per block. Finally, grids are set
to have a number of blocks where the number of
blocks multiplied by the threads per block match
the number of pixels to process.
3.2. CUDA memory
During kernel execution, the objects that are ac-
cessed on every frame are copied from global mem-
ory to shared memory. Each SM has its own copy
of the light objects, in order to reduce memory ac-
cess collisions caused by threads from dierent SM.
The scene object is also stored in the shared mem-
ory. The frame buer is only stored in the global
memory, as each pixel that is being processed can
have the corresponding color contribution assigned
to a completely dierent pixel in the resulting frame
buer. However, this is the slowest memory in the
GPU, and in the worst case, a thread stores a con-
tribution per calculated path.
3.3. CUDA kernels
Processing intensive tasks, which can also be imple-
mented in parallel, are implemented using dierent
kernels. This means that both vertex connection
and vertex merging are fully implemented using sep-
arate kernels.
3.3.1 Kernel congurations
Before discussing the implementation of the dier-
ent kernels, it is important to clarify that there are
5

---

## Page 6

three dierent kernel congurations, according to
type of memory used, and when light vertices are
connected to the camera. The main conguration,
also identied as conguration 1, uses only global
memory, not considering cache transactions, for all
memory transactions that take place during the ap-
plication lifetime. In conguration 2, the light ver-
tices connection to camera is done in a dedicated
kernel, after the light path tracing kernel is exe-
cuted. Finally, conguration 3 adds shared memory
to conguration 2, to store some static data that is
read often, with lights as an example. Table 1 sum-
marizes the congurations used.
Conguration Global Shared Connection
1 Yes No No
2 Yes No Yes
3 Yes Yes Yes
Table 1: Kernel congurations according to mem-
ory and kernels used
3.3.2 Kernels implemented
The two main kernels that are implemented
are GenerateLightPaths and GenerateCameraP-
aths. As the name implies, these are used to trace
light and camera paths, respectively. Two addi-
tional kernels are used, ResetIterations and Get-
FrameBuerData , to set the GPU global memory to
a valid state on each iteration, and to get the nal
frame buer data, when all iterations are nished,
respectively. These previously mentioned kernels
are used in all congurations. Congurations 2 and
3 use two additional kernels to allow postponing the
camera connection in the light path tracing kernel
and the use of shared memory. These consist in a
kernel to connect the light vertices to the camera,
ConnectLightPathToCamera , and a kernel to reset
the information if a light vertex should be connected
to the camera, ResetConnections .
3.3.3 Kernel setup
Before running a kernel, all the required arrays are
initialized in the host. Data that is required to
run the kernels is also initialized and copied at this
stage. For example, all the scene data is copied
from the host to the GPU. This includes geometry,
light and material data. If a kernel that runs mul-
tiple iterations at once is initialized, the number of
iterations is also passed to the kernel as parameter.
3.4. Light path tracing
The light path tracing stage of the algorithm, intro-
duced in section 2.10, has an overall implementation
very similar to the implementation in SmallVCM.3.4.1 Conguration 1
The rst conguration consists in just replacing the
outer most loop, which iterates over every pixel,
in order to calculate the corresponding light paths.
The path index is returned using the current block
of threads and thread IDs running in the GPU.
3.4.2 Conguration 2
In this conguration, light vertices are not con-
nected to the camera until all threads are nished
in the light tracing stage. In order to be able to
postpone the camera connection, all the data re-
quired must be stored in dierent arrays, in the
global memory. This is to enable passing data be-
tween kernels, as the camera connection is processed
in a dierent kernel. The kernel used to connect the
light path with the camera uses a number of threads
equal to the total number of sub paths for every
pixel. If multiple iterations are being calculated at
once, the number of iterations is also included. The
total number of sub paths is then given by equation
2.
totalSubPaths =whpathLengthiterations ;
(2)
Using this approach results in a signicant in-
crease in GPU memory usage. This limits the max-
imum resolution that a render can have, as well as
the iterations that can be processed on each kernel
execution. For reference, the total required mem-
ory, in bytes, for a single sub path is 142 bytes.
3.4.3 Conguration 3
The third conguration uses shared memory to
store the lights and part of the scene data, on top
of conguration 2. The lights are part of the scene,
in the original SmallVCM implementation, and in
this conguration, the lights are copied to separate
arrays in shared memory. However, the geometry
data, which is also part of the scene, is not copied
to the shared memory.
3.5. Camera path tracing
Following the same approach as in light path trac-
ing stage, the camera path tracing stage of the al-
gorithm, introduced in section 2.11, has an overall
implementation very similar to the implementation
in SmallVCM. It is at this stage that vertex connec-
tion and merging operations, introduced in sections
2.12 and 2.13 respectively, take place. This stage
is implemented using two dierent congurations,
1 and 3.
3.5.1 Conguration 1
Similarly to light paths stage, the rst congura-
tion consists in just replacing the outer most loop.
This loop iterates over every pixel, in order to calcu-
6

---

## Page 7

late the corresponding camera paths. As the loop
is the same, the path index is returned using the
current block of threads and thread IDs running in
the GPU.
3.5.2 Conguration 3
In camera path calculation, for conguration 3,
shared memory is again used to store the lights and
the scene data. The data stored in shared mem-
ory is the same previously mentioned in light path
tracing kernel, and light data is copied to shared
memory by reusing the same function used in this
kernel.
3.6. Hash grid
Between the light and camera path tracing stages,
the hash grid is created based on the light paths
data. The calculation of this data structure is per-
formed by the CPU. Implementing the code simi-
larly to the CPU implementation results in a very
slow calculation, slowing down the whole rendering
of the scene. Due to this reason, the light vertices
data required for calculations is copied from GPU
to host memory. After doing the hash grid calcu-
lation, the result is then copied to the GPU, to be
used in the vertex merging stage.
3.7. Frame buer
Color data for the nal render is stored in the frame
buer. To improve light and camera path tracing
kernel performance, each iteration has its own frame
buer. This ensures that when color data is being
written, the number of collisions is reduced as much
as possible. However, collisions can still occur for
a given iteration, as dierent paths can write color
data to the same location. The temporary color
data is copied to the main frame buer after cal-
culating the contributions for all light and camera
vertices, and after vertex connection and merging
is performed.
3.8. Iteration reset
In order to have an iteration in a clean state, it
is enough to reset the iteration frame buer and
the array with the path lengths for the light path
tracing stage. All the other data is generated per
iteration, without any intermediate memory that
requires being reset.
3.9. Kernel congurations summary
CUDA VCM can be executed using 3 dierent con-
gurations, where each conguration changes the
types of memory used, and postpones the connec-
tion of light path vertices to camera. These cong-
urations are summarized in table 1.
4. Evaluation methodology
When implementing a new solution or modifying
an existing one, the results need to be evaluated,to check if it conforms to the specications and if
the objectives are achieved. In this case, the pro-
posed solution consists in optimizing performance,
while keeping the resulting images as close as pos-
sible to the original implementation. This means
that the verication and validation is done by com-
paring both hardware performance, and generated
images.
4.1. Scenes
In order to compare SmallVCM with CUDA VCM,
we need to make sure that the conditions are simi-
lar. This means that the scenes to be tested, includ-
ing the light conditions, must be the same. Other-
wise, the render results are dierent, invalidating a
valid comparison. In this case, the scenes are hard
coded in the SmallVCM implementation, and the
same scenes are used in CUDA VCM. In section 5,
one scene consisting of a Cornell Box is used. This
scene has an area light, and a large sphere with a
mirror material, with reectance equal to 1, is the
single object present in the scene. The walls and
ceiling of the box use diuse materials, and the oor
uses a glossy material.
4.1.1 Reference images
All generated images, including the ones generated
by SmallVCM, are compared against reference im-
ages for the corresponding scenes. These images are
generated using SmallVCM, with a total of 10000
render iterations each.
4.1.2 Iterations per scene
All comparisons are done against scenes rendered
with the same amount of samples. Instead of check-
ing how many iterations can be performed within a
dened time interval, the number of iterations to be
rendered are passed as an argument. This ensures
that the image comparison is performed between
images that should be equal, or with as less as dif-
ferences as possible.
All scenes are rendered with the same amount
of iterations, and each scene is rendered multiple
times, each with a dierent number of iterations.
The target iterations are 1, 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100.
All there renders are considered for render time
analysis. However, for image comparison purposes,
only the renders with 100 iterations are considered.
4.1.3 Light and camera path length
The paths generated in both light and camera path
tracing all have the same maximum length, and
thus, the same number of sub paths or vertices. The
length of these is set to 10, in all scenes.
4.2. Hardware
Final rendering tests are performed on up to date
and high end hardware, providing accurate results
7

---

## Page 8

for the currently available technology. The speci-
cations of the machine where CUDA VCM is ex-
ecuted are a AMD Ryzen 7 3700X 8-Core CPU,
with a base clock frequency of 3.6GHz and 16GB of
DDR4 RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080
GPU, with 8GB of GDDR6.
4.3. Image comparison
Besides the performance comparison, the nal ren-
der results also must be compared. The metrics
used to compare images in the scope of this work are
absolute error count (AE), peak signal to noise ra-
tio (PSNR), root mean squared error (RMSE) and
structure similarity index metric (SSIM).
5. Results evaluation
The GPU implementation of VCM is considered to
be better than SmallVCM if the quality is similar
or better, and if the processing time is smaller, for
the same number of iterations. The image quality
metrics are calculated according to the metrics de-
scribed in section 4.3. The congurations can be
found in table 1. As a reminder, the reference im-
age is generated using SmallVCM, with a total of
10000 iterations. In the render results comparison,
this is the gure identied as reference .
One very important remark about the results in
this section is that the results from the GeForce
RTX 2080 are taken from the application running
with debug symbols enabled, and so, the results pre-
sented do not match the best case for CUDA VCM
running on this hardware.
5.1. Scene evaluation
The scene consists of a single large sphere, with a
mirror material applied to it, and a single area light,
in the ceiling. The environment color is black, and
is reected in the front of the sphere. The render re-
sults are shown in gure 4, with the reference image
on the left.
Rendering the scene using conguration 2 intro-
duces some visible artifacts in some of the renders,
depending on the number of iterations. The same
applies to rendering the scene using conguration
3, where shared memory is used to store frequently
accessed data. These artifacts are visible in gure
5.
Figure 6 shows the render times for the scene ren-
dered with all target iterations, using a logarithmic
scale.
Render times for the scene with a target of 100
iterations are listed in table 2. Table 3 lists the dif-
ferences between the render results for a target of
100 iterations and the reference render, with 10000
samples, for AE and PSNR metrics, and table 4 lists
the dierences for RMSE and SSIM metrics. For
render time, the performance of both GPUs is sig-
nicantly worse than the CPU, and the dierence is
(a) Reference
 (b) SmallVCM
(c) Conguration 1
 (d) Conguration 3
Figure 4: Scene 1 rendered with 100 frames, with
image 4a as reference render
(a) Conguration 2 (100 i)
 (b) Conguration 3 (10 i)
Figure 5: Render artifacts in scene 1 for deferred
camera connection and shared memory congura-
tion
020 40 60 80100 120 140 16015102050100100
time(s)iterationsSmallVCM
CUDA 2080
CUDA 960M
Figure 6: Render time for all iterations in scene 1
8

---

## Page 9

Conguration Duration (s)
SmallVCM 28,148
Conguration 1 105,830
Conguration 3 106,326
Table 2: Render time for scene 1
Conguration AE PSNR (dB)
SmallVCM 241798 39,306
CUDA VCM 244044 36,252
Shared memory 246213 33,169
Table 3: Image comparison metrics for scene 1
proportional to the number of iterations. Deferring
the camera connection and using the shared mem-
ory to store frequently accessed data does not have
any signicant performance impact, being slightly
worse when shared memory is used. The quality of
the resulting render for 100 iterations, using cong-
uration 1, is the closest to the reference render. As
previously seen in gure 5, the renders using ker-
nel congurations 2 and 3 introduce artifacts in the
renders, reducing the overall quality according to
the metrics results.
5.2. Final considerations
Besides the much higher core count on a CUDA
GPU, the code must be implemented using ecient
data access patterns. Otherwise, the performance
achieved can be signicantly lower compared to a
CPU, even when the number of threads is theoreti-
cally the maximum for the GPU, and faster memory
types are used. In the case of rendering algorithms,
it is also very dicult to have code optimized to
all scene congurations, and render times can be
signicant dierent for scenes with similar object
shapes, but with dierent materials or light cong-
urations. Contrary to what is expected, all render
times are signicantly worse in the CUDA VCM im-
plementation, when executed in NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 2080. This is due to the application running
with GPU debug information enabled, as CUDA
compiler would crash otherwise. When the GPU
debug information is enabled, the application runs
Conguration RMSE (0-1) SSIM
SmallVCM 2,762 (0,011) 0,910
Conguration 1 3,926 (0,015) 0,905
Conguration 3 5,599 (0,022) 0,905
Table 4: Image comparison metrics for scene 1signicantly slower due to all code optimizations
being disabled. Some CUDA sample projects were
also executed in NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080, with
both the GPU debug information ag enabled and
disabled. The dierence factor between executing
the samples with the ag -G disabled and enabled
is greater than 10. According to these results, the
execution of CUDA VCM should theoretically be
faster in the GeForce RTX 2080 GPU, compared to
the CPU.
6. Conclusions
Fine tuning a CUDA application is a process that
requires a deep understanding of how both the soft-
ware, but most importantly, GPU hardware work.
With each new architecture released by NVIDIA,
memory access patterns evolve, and new hardware
capabilities are added to the GPUs. Data optimiza-
tion patterns should be used, in order to get the
best performance out of the dierent types of mem-
ory available in the GPU, as the number of CUDA
cores is not enough to increase performance, as it
happens with faster CPUs. That being said, tradi-
tional software development techniques cannot be
used, where trusting the compiler to optimize the
software is often enough. In a CUDA application,
the developer is responsible for the most critical op-
timizations, that may be the dierence between a
very fast or very slow application. Rendering algo-
rithms have the particularity of the data in memory
being accessed with high divergence, coupled with
the innite combinations of materials and objects
that can be part of a scene. This high divergence
is the result of rays being cast from the camera or
from the light sources having a high probability of
bouncing in very dierent directions.
6.1. Achievements
The main goal of this thesis, which consisted in hav-
ing an implementation of the VCM algorithm to be
executed faster on CUDA GPUs, when compared
to an implementation to be executed on CPUs,
was not achieved. Nonetheless, the overall work is
proven to have been a very rich experience about
parallel processing using CUDA, and its relation
with rendering algorithms, in this case, by imple-
menting VCM.
6.2. Code structure and hardware usage
Ecient code in a kernel is directly related with the
amount of instructions that need to be executed,
and hardware resources used in the GPU. Kernels
must then consist of a good balance between num-
ber of instructions present in the code, which trans-
lates in number of registers used, number of threads,
and memory allocated, both dening the number of
warps that can be executed simultaneously in a SM.
In the scope of CUDA VCM, there are also multiple
9

---

## Page 10

conditions that stop light and camera paths being
traced, resulting in idle threads, which is then re-
ected in the overall performance of the GPU.
6.3. Memory usage
The best types of memory to be used should be
decided based on how data is stored in memory, and
how it is accessed. For rendering algorithms, it is
not an easy task to optimize an application to make
good use of memory. This thesis focused mostly in
the usage of global memory, with some data being
stored in shared memory. However, for future work,
shared memory can be further explored, as well as
constant memory.
6.4. Future Work
In this section, all the unnished work is summa-
rized, and any future work that is not discussed yet
is added, where the current CUDA implementation
can be used as a starting point.
6.4.1 Render a scene using smaller portions
The intrinsic divergence present in rendering algo-
rithms is caused by rays bouncing in dierent direc-
tions, even for the same path, both for camera and
light sub paths. Using a combination of rendering
smaller portions of a scene, together with storing
the data for these portions in adjacent memory po-
sitions, can be an ecient method to reduce render
times.
6.4.2 Shared memory
Shared memory was implemented only for storing
part of the scene properties, and the light sources.
Geometry is a very good candidate to be stored in
shared memory, as it is used for each sub path, for
each iteration. Geometry is static during the whole
scene rendering, and is used by all SM.
6.4.3 Hash grid calculation using GPU
The hash grid used to detect vertices that should
be merged is implemented in the CPU. This means
that there are memory transactions to copy light
vertices related data to the system RAM, hash grid
is calculated, and the result is then copied to GPU.
The hash grid is implemented in the CPU due to
the exclusive prex sum (or scan), that when im-
plemented in the GPU was slower than calculating
it in the CPU.
6.4.4 Support for non square images
The current implementation only allows square im-
ages to be render. Due to this limitations, dierent
aspect ratios cannot be rendered.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor for all
the help and support provided since the beginningof this thesis, and Instituto Superior T ecnico for the
high quality education I was provided.
References
[1] Nvidia cuda zone website. https://
developer.nvidia.com/cuda-zone .
[2] Smallvcm website. http://www.smallvcm.
com/ .
[3] J. Arvo. Backward ray tracing. In ACM SIG-
GRAPH '86 Course Notes - Developments in
Ray Tracing , pages 259{263, 1986.
[4] I. Georgiev. Path Sampling Techniques for Ef-
cient Light Transport Simulation . PhD thesis,
Saarland University, Saarbr ucken, Germany,
2015.
[5] I. Georgiev, J. K riv anek, T. Davidovi c, and
P. Slusallek. Light transport simulation with
vertex connection and merging. ACM Trans.
Graph. , 31(6), 2012.
[6] K. Group. The khronos group releases opencl
1.0 specication. https://www.khronos.org/
news/press/the_khronos_group_releases_
opencl_1.0_specification , 2008.
[7] T. Hachisuka, S. Ogaki, and H. W. Jensen.
Progressive photon mapping. ACM Trans.
Graph. , 27(5), 2008.
[8] H. W. Jensen. Global illumination using pho-
ton maps. In Proceedings of the Eurographics
Workshop on Rendering Techniques '96 , page
21{30, 1996.
[9] J. T. Kajiya. The rendering equation. Pro-
ceedings of the 13th Annual Conference on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques
(SIGGRAPH '86) , 20(4):143{150, 1986.
[10] D. B. Kirk and W.-m. W. Hwu. Programming
Massively Parallel Processors, 2nd edition, A
Hands-on Approach . Morgan Kaufmann, 2012.
[11] E. Veach. Robust Monte Carlo Methods for
Light Transport Simulation . PhD thesis, Stan-
ford University, Stanford, CA, USA, 1998.
[12] E. Veach and L. J. Guibas. Optimally combin-
ing sampling techniques for monte carlo ren-
dering. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Con-
ference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques , SIGGRAPH '95, page 419{428,
1995.
[13] T. Whitted. An improved illumination
model for shaded display. Commun. ACM ,
23(6):343{349, 1980.
10

---
